recipe_maintenance.md, before:

---
documentclass: scrartcl
title: "A Plan for Maintaining Spack Recipes"
subtitle: Draft version 1
date: "2025-02-10"
geometry: "left=1.0in,right=1.0in,top=1.5in,bottom=1.0in"
output:
  pdf_document:
    latex_engine: xelatex
classoption:
  - twocolumn
  - letterpaper
  - 9pt
numbersections: true
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{graphicx}
  - \usepackage{microtype}
---

# Introduction

This document proposes a plan for CSAID maintenance of Spack recipes.

# Preconditions

## Fork of the Spack recipe repository

CSAID should maintain a fork of the main Spack repository that contains recipes.

The reason for having the fork is to allow us to modify recipes which we need to modify on our own timescale.
The Spack team sometimes delays the merging of a pull request (PR) into the Spack recipe repository.
By maintaining our own fork, we can accept merge requests more quickly and then feed them back to the main Spack recipe repository.

Maintenance of the fork is not free.
The main Spack recipe repository is updated frequently, and so we will need to automate the updating of the fork.
We anticipate that few recipes will need modification in our fork, and thus automatic updating of the fork will rarely lead to merge conflicts.
When conflicts do occur, whoever has modified the recipe should be responsible for reconciling the recipe.
We should also strive to push PRs from our fork to the main Spack recipe repository as quickly as possible.

PRs for modifications to the recipes should be submitted to the main Spack recipe repository whenver possible.
We should accept PRs to our fork only when there is a problem with the submission to the main Spack recipe repository that can not be fixed in a timely fashion.

## One repository for each CSAID project

CSAID should maintain one repository for each project, to contain the Spacke recipes for the project.

The reason for this is...

The cost of this is ...
# 

# Rules for maintaining Spack recipes

* If a package is developed under the control of a specific project, its
  recipe shall be maintained in a recipe repository appropriate to the
  project, and distinct from that of the package source.

* If a recipe for a required package exists in Spack's upstream
  repository, there shall be a compelling reason to not use it.

* If alterations are required to an upstream recipe, those alterations
  shall be upstreamed. If there are overriding time constraints, an
  equivalent PR may also be submitted to the CSAID fork with the
  understanding that the submitter is responsible for reconciliation as
  soon as reasonably practicable.

* If a recipe does not exist in Spack's upstream repository, then the
  new recipe shall be upstreamed if its applicability may reasonably be
  expected to be outside one experiment/project.

* If a new recipe would be upstreamed but for overriding time
  constraints, then it may be submitted in parallel to CSAID's fork with
  the understanding that the submitter is responsible for reconciliation
  as soon as reasonably practicable, and that upstream will be the
  primary venue for maintenance going forward.

Commit message:

Add reason for keeping one recipe repo per project

recipe_maintenance.md, after:

---
documentclass: scrartcl
title: "A Plan for Maintaining Spack Recipes"
subtitle: Draft version 1
date: "2025-02-10"
geometry: "left=1.0in,right=1.0in,top=1.5in,bottom=1.0in"
output:
  pdf_document:
    latex_engine: xelatex
classoption:
  - twocolumn
  - letterpaper
  - 9pt
numbersections: true
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{graphicx}
  - \usepackage{microtype}
---

# Introduction

This document proposes a plan for CSAID maintenance of Spack recipes.

# Preconditions

## Fork of the Spack recipe repository

CSAID should maintain a fork of the main Spack repository that contains recipes.

The reason for having the fork is to allow us to modify recipes which we need to modify on our own timescale.
The Spack team sometimes delays the merging of a pull request (PR) into the Spack recipe repository.
By maintaining our own fork, we can accept merge requests more quickly and then feed them back to the main Spack recipe repository.

Maintenance of the fork is not free.
The main Spack recipe repository is updated frequently, and so we will need to automate the updating of the fork.
We anticipate that few recipes will need modification in our fork, and thus automatic updating of the fork will rarely lead to merge conflicts.
When conflicts do occur, whoever has modified the recipe should be responsible for reconciling the recipe.
We should also strive to push PRs from our fork to the main Spack recipe repository as quickly as possible.

PRs for modifications to the recipes should be submitted to the main Spack recipe repository whenver possible.
We should accept PRs to our fork only when there is a problem with the submission to the main Spack recipe repository that can not be fixed in a timely fashion.

## One repository for each CSAID project

CSAID should maintain one repository for each project, to contain the Spacke recipes for the project.

The Spack recipe for a given package should not live in the same repository as the code for that package to avoid excessive and unnecessary changes in the recipe.
Keeping all the recipes for a given project in a single recipe repository provides some cohesion to the package.
It will also allow each project to have its own accounting of "minutes" spent on GitHub actions for continuous integration usage.

We should take care to ensure that the dependency graph of recipe repositories (as implied by the dependencies between the recipes) remains a directed acyclic graph.
Spack itself does not require this, but doing this will make it easier to ensure we do not introduce any cycles into the dependency graph of the packages themselves.



# Rules for maintaining Spack recipes

* If a package is developed under the control of a specific project, its
  recipe shall be maintained in a recipe repository appropriate to the
  project, and distinct from that of the package source.

* If a recipe for a required package exists in Spack's upstream
  repository, there shall be a compelling reason to not use it.

* If alterations are required to an upstream recipe, those alterations
  shall be upstreamed. If there are overriding time constraints, an
  equivalent PR may also be submitted to the CSAID fork with the
  understanding that the submitter is responsible for reconciliation as
  soon as reasonably practicable.

* If a recipe does not exist in Spack's upstream repository, then the
  new recipe shall be upstreamed if its applicability may reasonably be
  expected to be outside one experiment/project.

* If a new recipe would be upstreamed but for overriding time
  constraints, then it may be submitted in parallel to CSAID's fork with
  the understanding that the submitter is responsible for reconciliation
  as soon as reasonably practicable, and that upstream will be the
  primary venue for maintenance going forward.
